Write blog post about modules meta.yml file updates (#3426)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/blog/2025/modules-meta-yml.mdx

---
title: "The structure of modules meta.yml file"
subtitle: "Metadata"
headerImage: "https://unsplash.com/photos/magnifying-glass-mq8QogEBy00"
headerImageAlt: "A magnifying glass in a forest."
pubDate: 2025-07-07T16:30:00+01:00
authors:
    - "mirpedrol"
label:
    - "tools"
    - "modules"
maxHeadingDepth: 3
---

## Introduction

When nf-core modules were introduced, we decided to add a `meta.yml` which contains the metadata of the module.
This file describes:

- The tool(s) used in the module
- The structure of the channels
- The authors of the module

> This file has been changing recently. We identified improvements that could be made when describing the inputs and outputs of the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file has been changing recently. 
We identified improvements that could be made when describing the inputs and outputs of the module.
```

And we updated how the channels are described.
You can see the [first blog-post](https://nf-co.re/blog/2025/modules-ontology) we wrote about this changes for more context.

The first change consisted on grouping the input and output elements by channel. Before, they were all listed at the top level.
This change makes it easier to understand the channel structure of the module.

> But one last detail was still missing. We were not distinguishing between tuple channls and single element channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But one last detail was still missing. We were not distinguishing between tuple channels and single element channels.
```
Good spin that this was a missing feature not a bug 😁

Now, tuple channels correspond to lists in the `meta.yml` file. While single element channels are not included inside a list.

> You can check the [last modules PR]() to see the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see  the changes in [our PR on the modules repository](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/8747).
```

This is an example of the `bwa/mem` module.
See the difference beween tuple channels and single element channels such as `val sorted_bam` in the input and `versions` in the output.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-12 col-lg-5">
        ```groovy title="main.nf"
        process BWA_MEM {

            ...

            input:
            tuple val(meta) , path(reads)
            tuple val(meta2), path(index)
            tuple val(meta3), path(fasta)
            val   sort_bam

            output:
            tuple val(meta), path("*.bam"),  emit: bam,     optional: true
            tuple val(meta), path("*.cram"), emit: cram,    optional: true
            tuple val(meta), path("*.csi"),  emit: csi,     optional: true
            tuple val(meta), path("*.crai"), emit: crai,    optional: true
            path "versions.yml",             emit: versions

            ...

        }
        ```
    </div>
    <div class="col-12 col-lg-7">

>         ```yml title="meta.yml" caption="New file structure"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ```yml title="meta.yml" caption="New file structure" {26-29}
```
so you also highlight the lines mentioned above

                        description: Groovy Map containing sample information
                  - "*.cram":
                        type: file
                        description: Output CRAM file containing read alignments
                        pattern: "*.{cram}"
            - csi:
                - - meta:
                        type: file
                        description: Groovy Map containing sample information
                  - "*.csi":
                        type: file
                        description: Optional index file for BAM file
                        pattern: "*.{csi}"
            - crai:
                - - meta:
                        type: file
                        description: Groovy Map containing sample information
                  - "*.crai":
                        type: file
                        description: Optional index file for CRAM file
                        pattern: "*.{crai}"
            - versions:
                - versions.yml:
                    type: file
                    description: File containing software versions
                    pattern: "versions.yml"
        ...
        ```
    </div>

</div>

> To make these changes easier for users, we have the `--fix` flag in the nf-core linting command.
> This flag will try to fix all the possible lint failures related to the `meta.yml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the switch to the new structure easier for everyone using nf-core modules, you can add `--fix` to you modules lint command.
```bash
nf-core modules lint --fix bwa/mem
```
This flag will try to fix all the possible lint failures related to the `meta.yml` file.
```

---
title: "Meet the new meta.yml"
subtitle: "Changes to the structure of the meta.yml file for nf-core modules"

> headerImage: "https://unsplash.com/photos/magnifying-glass-mq8QogEBy00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
headerImage: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1547057740-4b18aac8eed2"
```
alternatively https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1549964336-67d7d7d74ac2 to point more to the metadata/archive point of this file.

headerImageAlt: "A magnifying glass in a forest."

> pubDate: 2025-07-07T16:30:00+01:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2025-07-07T12:30:00+01:00
```
